Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's video
we're going to look at this projective triple
quad formula or the corresponding affine version
which we'll call the triple spread formula and
connections with circumcircle x' of triangles
and a notion of curvature so it turns out that
the triple spread formula is a lovely tool
for getting at a very important concept from
classical calculus the idea of the curvature of
a curve so when I talk about the trip will spread
formula which is of course the affine version the
two-dimensional version of the one-dimensional
projective triple quad formula and here is that
formula again the three spreads s 1 s 2 and s 3
formed by three lines satisfy this relation here
which is part quadratic and has also a cubic term
which will be quite important in today's lecture
we're going to talk about the circumcircle of a
triangle and then we're to get at this idea of
curvature what those curvature mean first of
all in the context of circles and then we're going
to move towards understanding curvature of curves
without any calculus rather a novel approach so
let me remind you of an important relation that
we established a few videos ago we were talking
about the core circle if you recall which has
equation x squared plus y squared equals x and
its diameter here is the interval 0 to 1 along
the x axis and we saw that if we had three points
forming a triangle that was lying on this Cora
circle then there was a lovely relationship
between the three quadrants --is Q 1 Q 2 Q
3 of that triangle and the three spreads formed
by these lines emanating from the origin to the
points a 1 a 2 and a 3 more particularly this
quadrant Q 1 is exactly the same as the spread
s 1 here spread between these two lines or if
you prefer the projective quadrants between
these two projective 1 points same thing they're
exactly equal similarly Q to this quadrants here
is the same as spread between those two lines and
Q 3 the quadrants here is a spread between these
two lines and then we saw that the fact that
these three spreads satisfy the triple spread
formula combined with this immediately gives us
this relation amongst the three quadrants is of
this triangle contained in our core circle so
if we have a triangle that's on the core circle
then the three quadrants is satisfy exactly this
triple spread formula now this circle here has a
diameter quadrants D equals 1 let's use capital D
to represent the quadrants of the diameter here we
might well ask what happens to this relation if
we dilate the circle well now the fact that this
relation is not homogeneous becomes interesting
and important because this is quadratic this is
quadratic but this is cubic so if we dilate all
three quantities by the same amount we should
not expect that the relation continues to hold it
would hold if it was homogeneous all terms of the
same degree but since it's not the relation
is going to change that turns out to be an
interesting phenomena so the fact that these two
terms are quadratic and this one is cubic actually
ends up playing a very important role in a lot
of different areas in mathematics in particular
it gives us a rational handle on curvature so it
asked the question what happens if we do scale
things what happens to this relationship between
the three quadrants --is of our triangle contained
in our circle so let's talk about dilation
by factor D which is an important kind of
transformation in geometry even though it's not
an isometry it does change our metrical scale
but very important kind of transformation so in
classical geometry one writes something like this
let's suppose that we introduce the notation
Greek Delta for dilation then Delta sa sub D
would be that dilation it takes X y2 DX D what
we should think about that as a transformation
classically it's a kind of a mapping or a function
but that approach requires that you have a prior
understanding of what mapping or a function means
now we don't have such an understanding at least
not in great generality so we prefer rather to
define this dilation directly by a relation like
this now we just define what it means when we have
the two point XY followed by this symbol Delta
sub D we declare that this is equal to the two
point DX dy so basically we're just multiplying
both coordinates by D and this is valid for any D
rational number so here for example is a pictorial
visualization of what happens when say we dilate
by a factor of two so everything expands just in
the usual kind of scaling fashion that you're no
doubt familiar with so that little green house
there everything gets scaled this point gets to
that point this one goes there and this one goes
there this one goes there and we get the bigger
blue house as a result of scaling by two this
is a scaling that fixes the origin of course the
origin stays where it is and everything else moves
away from the origin so we should not claim that
this dilation scales lengths by D because after
all links are problematic for us in this exact
approach to geometry but we can't say that it
scales vectors by D and quadrants is by d squared
if we look at this vector say from the origin to
1 then that vector is transformed to the vector
from the origin to 2 that's what the scaling does
in terms of quadrants as well we move from
a quadrants of one to a quadrants of four in
general the dilation Delta some two will multiply
all quadrants by a factor four here's the official
statement there that the quadrants between a delta
D and B Delta D is d squared times the quadrants
between a and B that's how a dilation effects our
fundamental metrical notion of quadrants so let's
have a look at what this dilation by D does to our
core circle here's our core circle with diameter
from 0 to 1 right there that's smaller circle
with equation x squared plus y squared equals x
and now we want to dilate everything by factor
D in this case D is roughly a little bit more
than two so there's a point D on the x-axis so
our dilation takes this point 1 to that point
there keeps the origin where it is of course and
so it takes this circle here to this bigger circle
here we also see a triangle a 1 a 2 a 3 which is
lying on the core circle and its image under this
transformation say a 1 prime a 2 prime a 3 prime
that dilates of a 1 a 2 and a 3 forming our new
triangle a 1 prime a 2 prime a 3 prime on our new
circle and you can check that our new circle has
equation x squared plus y squared equals D times
X ok so what we're interested in is comparing the
three quadrants ha's of the original triangle
a 1 a 2 a 3 so let's suppose those quadrants
azar Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 we happen to know that since
they're lying on our core circle that these three
quadrants --is satisfy our triple spread formula
and we're interested in deducing something about
the three quadrants 'iz in this bigger triangle
the quadrants as we're calling q 1 prime Q 2
prime and Q 3 prime so if we let capital D be
the square of D then we know that Q 1 prime is
D times Q 1 our dilation by D changes quadrants
is by a factor of D squared or capital D so Q 1
prime is D times Q 1 Q 2 prime is D times Q 2 and
Q 3 prime is D times Q 3 great so what happens to
this relation between the Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 well
suppose that we multiply this whole formula by
d squared so then there will be a DQ 1 here at DQ
2 a DQ 3 here DQ 1 all squared a DQ 2 all squared
of D Q 3 all squared and we're multiplying by a
d squared here so if we want to put a DQ 1 DQ 2
DQ 3 there we have to divide by a D to make that
all work so if we multiply through by d squared
then we can rewrite this equation as Q 1 prime
plus Q 2 prime plus Q 3 prime squared equals to
Q 1 prime squared plus Q 2 prime square plus Q
3 prime squared plus 4 Q 1 prime Q 2 prime Q 3
prime divided by D so here with the difference
between the cubic aspect here and the quadratic
aspect here manifests itself in the way that when
we dilate we're picking up an additional factor
of capital D there in the denominator now our
triple spread formula really contains a triple
quad formula and this cubic term so if we bring
this to the other side then the left-hand side is
just the quad riah of our triangle a 1 prime a 2
prime a 3 prime so we can rewrite this formula as
a prime equals for Q 1 prime u 2 prime Q 3 prime
divided by D where a prime is the quadrille of
this triangle and I remind you that 16 times the
square of the area so this is a lovely relation
that brings the connection between the quad ria
the three quadrants --is and this of quadratic
diameter of the circle on which a 1 prime
a 2 prime and a 3 prime line I have to just
introduce a little bit of notation for our circle
here's a circle Center there so there's two sort
of ways of describing the size of the circle in
this rational trigonometry setup one is to take
their rational equivalent of the radius and the
other is to take the rational equivalent of the
diameter okay so if we have a circle with equation
X minus a squared plus y minus B squared equals
say R then let's call our the circum quadrants of
the circle traditionally that would be the square
of the radius radius squared I'll call that the
circum quadrants and that diameter quadrants will
refer that to be the quadrants of a diameter which
is going to be 4 times R because if you multiply
a length by 2 the quadrants gets multiplied by 4
this is our this is our this is all together for
R in terms of quadrants so we'll use this notation
today that R stands for the circum quadrants of a
circle that's the radius squared and capital
D stands for the diameter quadrants which is
the length of the diameter squared relating it
to classical stuff of course these are really
rational quantities which don't depend on any
square roots so they're defined over the rationals
and here's really a restatement of what we've just
found we call this a circum quadrants formula we
have a triangle a 1 a 2 a 3 and here is the
circle that passes through those three points
there's the center of that circle usually called
the circumcenter of the triangle I remind you
that it's obtained by taking the perpendicular
bisectors of the three sides so you take the
midpoints of each of the three sides and take a
perpendicular line those three perpendicular lines
meet at this circumcenter that's the center of
the circle which passes through the three points
so if our quadrants is our Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 and
if the quad rear of this triangle is a then the
formula that we've basically just established
here is that the circum quadrants are is Q 1 Q
2 Q 3 over a and this follows from the formula
that we just obtained from the formula for the
diameter quadrants capital D we saw that that was
4 Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 over a so if we want an R well R
will be 1/4 of D so we just have to get rid of
that factor of 4 there and we get the formula
for the circum quadrants of a triangle in terms
of the three quadrants 'iz and the quadrille of
the triangle very attractive and important formula
and i remind you yet again that the Quadra is 16
times the square of the area of the triangle
so let's have a look at the example here's a
triangle a 1 a 2 a 3 made of points 1 3 2 2 and
minus 1 minus 2 the three quadrants --is of this
triangle are q1 quadrants between here and here
which will be 3 squared plus 4 squared or 25 q2
which is the squadron's here the difference of two
and difference of five so we get 2 squared plus 5
squared that's the quantity of 29 and the Quietus
between these two points it's a difference of 1
and 1 or minus 1 so we get 1 squared plus minus
1 squared equals 2 those are our three quadrants
--is the quadrille here's a formula for that
that's basically the triple quad formula 25 plus
29 plus 2 all squared minus 2 times 25 squared
plus 29 squared plus 2 squared and an alternate
formula for that which is often computationally
simpler is to take two out of the three let's
say 25 and 2 and take 4 times 25 times 2 and then
subtract the difference between the third one 29
and these other 225 minus 2 all squared either
way you get 196 for the quadrille so that's 16
times the square of the area of this triangle
so our formula for the circum quadrants of the
triangle is R equals Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 over the quad ria
a so 25 times 29 times 2 divided by a 196 which
is 725 over 98 so that's the circum quadrants of
the triangle that's the quadrants of the circle
which passes through the three points that's
roughly has center there something like this
if we wanted in a classical sense the standard
radius usually called the circumradius of the
triangle we would have to take a square root
of this take in an approximate sense because
that's really all what we can do and you get some
decimal expansion that starts something like this
so here we're moving to applied mathematics we've
left pure mathematics when we're talking about
something like this here we have pure mathematics
here we have applied mathematics that's all well
and good but it's not really pure mathematics
anymore well it's a very simple and elegant
formula well worth remembering now I'm going
to use that in a slightly reciprocal way so in
classical differential geometry one defines the
curvature little K of a circle to be the inverse
of the reciprocal of the radius so little K is
one over R where R is the radius of the circle
now for us this is a problematic definition
because the radius of a circle is problematic
typical circle requires a square roots in order
to calculate a radius and that's not available
to us at least not exactly so this definition
will have to be modified will basically have to
square this definition and look at a corresponding
quadratic notion so we call that quadratic notion
the quadratic curvature and in keeping with
our general tendency to write capitals for the
quadratic analogues of ordinary quantities we'll
write the quadratic curvature to be capital K
and so our definition is going to be that that's
going to be the inverse or the reciprocal of the
quadrants so 1 over capital R this is a rational
quantity because the quadrants of a circle is
rational so for example the quadratic curvature
of this circle X minus 1 squared plus y minus 2
squared equals 5 will be K equals 1/5 because
the quadrants is 5 so what over the quadrants
is the curvature so clearly the smaller R is
the bigger the curvature is so small circles
have high curvature and the bigger the circle is
the bigger R will be the smaller the curvature is
big circles have small curvature little circles
have big curvature all right so now let's have a
look at circle quadratic curvature so we have a
circle and we might be interested in what is its
quadratic curvature one way of calculating that
if we don't know what a diameter is directly for
example if it's just a circle on a page we may
not be able to easily measure a diameter but
if we can find three points on that circle then we
can hope to measure the quadrants is between those
three points therefore we have a triangle we can
calculate the quadri of the triangle because it's
a consequence of knowing through three quadrants
--is and then we can write down what the quadratic
curvature of the circle is the circle in this case
is called the circumcircle of the triangle okay
and the formula is that K equals the quadrille
over Q 1 Q 2 Q 3 and the course is just the
reciprocal of the formula that we've already
established for the circum quadrants of that
same circle the circum quadrants was the product
of the quadrants is divided by the quadrille so
the curvature is going to be the Quadra divided
by the product of the three quadrants --is so it's
a very lovely formula really and again brings to
the fore the importance of this quad RIA the quad
RIA is 16 times the square of the area but here it
appears very nicely no coefficients just the quad
RIA divided by the three quadrants is and that's
our quadratic curvature of the circle and a little
exercise to show that you can write this thing
in an alternate way using this formula here are
this very intriguing kind of situation because
now we're in the possibility of measuring the
curvature of this circle by knowing something
about three points on the circle and the three
points can be anywhere they want to be it doesn't
matter where those three points are this quantity
is always going to be the same in particular we
could choose these three points to be actually
quite close together if there are quite close
together forming a rather in little triangle
the formula is still going to be theoretically
correct so in practice this gives us a way of
effectively finding the curvature of a circle
even if we're only familiar with a very small
part of it this turns out to be an interesting
concept because 17th century mathematicians
were quite interested in more general curves and
they realized that the idea of curvature applied
to more general curves not just circles we can
ask about the curvature of a general curve at a
particular point on that curve now traditionally
this is part of the story of calculus but we're
going to see that this approach to curvature is
actually quite amenable to rational analysis and
will give you yet some more evidence of the idea
that we can replace a lot of classical mathematics
that involves infinite processes and limiting
processes with more concrete finite algebraic
mathematics and we're going to demonstrate that
for you next time by looking at the curvature of
a parabola and establishing a famous formula for
the curvature of a parabola at a general point
without any calculus I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening